Minutes for [[IRC]] meeting at 18:00 UTC (10am PST). Feel free
to expand on this with as much detail as you want. Also available:
the [[raw_log|log.txt]].

Attendees: Jamey Sharp, Christoph Pfister, Vincent Torri,
Josh Triplett, Julien Cristau, Rob Taylor, Thomas Hunger,
Ian Osgood, Bart Massey

- Review the [[TODO]] list.
  - Define new goals for near future.
  - Missing extensions / features.
  - Fix Sync extension init request.
  - Fix struct padding issue.
    - Short-term fix: `__attribute__((packed))`?
    - Long-term fix: rewrite output layer?
  - Output layer could use a mechanism like output iterators, writing a
    struct at a time.  `xcb_foo_request_start()`,
    `xcb_foo_request_some_component()`*, `xcb_foo_request_end()`
- We're almost ready for a new libxcb release, after:
  - Update the version dependency on xcb-proto.
  - [[ReleasingXcb]]
- Review remaining issues blocking use of Xlib/XCB by default.
  - What about the other deadlock with ico (process_responses)?
- Find bug reports and e-mail that hasn't been properly responded to.
  - There are 27 open bugs in bugzilla; find the important ones.
  - 5960: arguably not XCB's bug; apps should retry if they want that.
  - 6682 (X meets Z): not ready yet
  - 6812 (change isvoid to flags): API/ABI break, not very important
  - 9944: should already be fixed in git and the upcoming release
  - 10637: code generation bug, not critical
- Bugs against things other than the XCB core:
  - 9463: needs to happen, eventually
  - 11285 (memory leak in Xlib/XCB): need investigation
  - 11751: probable process_responses bug, needs investigation
- Review the new Python code generator.
  - Who has Python skills?
- Bart partway done with converting x11perf to XCB.
  - May need some help.
  - Suggested changes to util
- util canonization schedule / plan
  - Obviously not everything is at the same stage
    - aux has high priority
- Getting more projects to convert to XCB
  - ecore-xcb: running, but some points missing [Vincent]
  - porting toolkits based on evas and ecore [Vincent]
  - keyboard hell!
  - Wine, gstreamer (potentially fixes locking bugs), mplayer
  - Window managers
  - Language bindings
- Documentation needs help
  - wiki is broken
  - move core api docs into doxygen headers [Bart]
  - generate protocol docs from XML <doc> comments [Thomas, Vincent]
  - add error management in the tutorial [Vincent]
- Include xinput.xml in proto
- consider bugs 5962, 6105, 6684, 6686, 5958 for python generator
- Ping Zack Rusin about porting Qt

Future meetings:
- xcb-util refactor and release (Bart)
- XKB, XKB2, how to stop butchering kittens (coordinate with Daniel Stone)
