Minutes for [[IRC]] meeting at 18:00 UTC (10am PST). Feel free
to expand on this with as much detail as you want.

Attendees: Jamey Sharp, Christoph Pfister, Vincent Torri,
Josh Triplett, Julien Cristau, Rob Taylor, Thomas Hunger,
Ian Osgood, Bart Massey

- Review the [[TODO]] list.
  - Define new goals for near future.
  - Missing extensions / features.
  - Fix Sync extension init request.
  - Fix struct padding issue.
- Review changes in libxcb since last release and check whether we're
  ready for a new release.
  - There are 34 commits including some major bug fixes.
  - What else should be done before a release?
    [[ReleasingXcb]]
- Review remaining issues blocking use of Xlib/XCB by default.
  - What about the other deadlock with ico (process_responses)?
- Find bug reports and e-mail that hasn't been properly responded to.
  - There are 27 open bugs in bugzilla; find the important ones.
- Review the new Python code generator.
  - Who has Python skills?
- I'm partway done with converting x11perf to XCB.
  - May need some help.
  - Suggested changes to util
  - util canonization schedule / plan
